DOCSP-41757 read count documents (#58)
mongodb/docs-java-rs: source/read/count-documents.txt

.. _java-rs-count:

===============
Count Documents
===============

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: number, amount, estimation, code example

Overview
---------

> In this guide, you can learn how to retrieve an accurate and estimated count of the

Reviewer: I: reads like this is a single count that is both accurate and estimated

```suggestion
In this guide, you can learn how to retrieve an accurate count and an estimated count of the
```

> In this guide, you can learn how to retrieve an accurate and estimated count of the

Reviewer: Q: do we use "accurate" elsewhere in our docs to refer to this kind of count? just asking because [pushes glasses up nose] technically, an estimate can also be highly accurate

Author: This is the wording we used in pymongo. I can change it to "an exact count"

Reviewer: I do think "exact count" is better!

number of documents in a collection.

.. _java-rs-accurate-count:

Retrieve an Accurate Count
--------------------------

> Use the ``countDocuments()`` method to count the number of documents that are in a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the ``countDocuments()`` method to count the number of documents in a
```

> collection. To count the number of documents that match a specific search
> critera, pass a dictionary that includes a query filter to the

Reviewer: I: "criteria" is plural (and typoed here)

```suggestion
collection. To count the number of documents that match specific search
criteria, pass a dictionary that includes a query filter to the
```

   Flux.from(countPublisher).doOnNext(System.out::println).blockLast();

Count Specific Documents
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To return a count of documents that match specific search criteria, specify your
query in the ``countDocuments()`` method, as shown in the following example. To
learn more about how to specify a query, see :ref:`java-rs-specify-query`.

.. code-block:: java
   
   Publisher<Long> countPublisher = restaurants.countDocuments(
           eq("cuisine", "Italian"));
   Flux.from(countPublisher)
           .doOnNext(System.out::println)
           .blockLast();

Customize Count Behavior
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can modify the behavior of the ``countDocuments()`` method by passing
optional parameters to the method. The ``CountOptions`` class provides methods that modify
the behavior of the ``countDocuments()`` method. To use the ``CountOptions``
class, construct a new instance of the class, then call one or more of its methods
to modify the count operation. You can chain these method calls together.

To modify the behavior of the count operation, pass the class instance and
chained method calls as the last argument to the ``countDocuments()`` method. 

> If you don't specify any options, the driver does not customize the count operation.

Reviewer: S: instead, say what it means to not customize the count operation

> The following table describes the options you can set to customize ``countDocuments()``:

Reviewer: S:

```suggestion
The following table describes the methods in the ``CountOptions`` class:
```

.. list-table::
   :widths: 30 70
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Method
     - Description
      
   * - ``collation(Collation collation)``
     - | Specifies the kind of language collation to use when sorting
         results. For more information, see :manual:`Collation </reference/collation/#std-label-collation>`

>          in the MongoDB Server manual.  

Reviewer: Q: Is there a source constant for MongoDB Server? If so, good to use (applies throughout)

   * - ``comment(BsonValue comment)``
     - | Attaches a ``BsonValue`` comment to the operation. For more information, see the :manual:`insert command
         fields </reference/command/insert/#command-fields>` guide in the
         MongoDB Server manual.  

   * - ``comment(String comment)``
     - | Attaches a ``String`` comment to the operation. For more information, see the :manual:`insert command
         fields </reference/command/insert/#command-fields>` guide in the
         MongoDB Server manual.  

   * - ``hint(Bson hint)``
     - | Sets the index for the operation as a ``Bson`` value. 
         For more information, see the :manual:`hint statement </reference/command/update/#std-label-update-command-hint>`
         in the MongoDB Server manual.

   * - ``hintString(String hint)``
     - | Sets the index for the operation as a ``String`` value.
         For more information, see the :manual:`hint statement </reference/command/update/#std-label-update-command-hint>`
         in the MongoDB Server manual.

   * - ``limit(int limit)``

>      - | Sets a limit for the maximum number of documents the cursor will
>          return. For more information, see :manual:`cursor

Reviewer: I: try to stick to present tense.

```suggestion
     - | Sets a limit for the maximum number of documents the cursor
         returns. For more information, see :manual:`cursor
```

         </reference/glossary/#std-term-cursor>` in the MongoDB Server documentation.

   * - ``MaxTime(long maxTime, TimeUnit timeUnit)``

>      - | Sets the maximum execution time on the server for the operation.

Reviewer: Q: Anything notable if that time limit is reached? Exception?

   * - ``skip(int skip)``

>      - | Sets the number of documents to skip before MongoDB returns results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - | Sets the number of documents the query skips before returning results.
```

         For more information, see :manual:`skip </reference/method/cursor.skip/#cursor.skip>` in the
         MongoDB Server manual

Modify Count Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following code uses the ``countDocuments()`` method to count all the documents in the
``restaurants`` collection with a ``cuisine`` value of ``"Italian"``. It also

> attaches a ``String`` comment to the operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
attaches the comment ``"Count all Italian restaurants"`` to the operation as a ``String``.
```

.. code-block:: java

   Publisher<Long> countPublisher = restaurants.countDocuments(
           eq("cuisine", "Italian"),
          new CountOptions().comment("Count all Italian restaurants"));

   Flux.from(countPublisher)
           .doOnNext(System.out::println)
           .blockLast();

.. _java-rs-estimated-count:

Retrieve an Estimated Count
---------------------------

You can get an estimate of the number of documents in a collection by calling

> the ``estimatedDocumentCount()`` method. The method estimates the amount of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the ``estimatedDocumentCount()`` method. The method estimates the number of
```

documents based on collection metadata, which might be faster than performing an 
accurate count.

The following example estimates the number of documents in a collection:

.. code-block:: java
   
   Publisher<Long> countPublisher = restaurants.estimatedDocumentCount();
   Flux.from(countPublisher)
           .doOnNext(System.out::println)
           .blockLast();

Customize Estimated Count Behavior
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can modify the behavior of the ``estimatedDocumentCount()`` method by passing
optional parameters to the method. The ``EstimatedDocumentCountOptions`` class provides methods that modify
the behavior of the ``estimatedDocumentCount()`` method. To use the ``EstimatedDocumentCountOptions``
class, construct a new instance of the class, then call one or more of its methods
to modify the count operation. You can chain these method calls together.

To modify the behavior of the count operation, pass the class instance and
chained method calls as the only argument to the ``estimatedDocumentCount()`` method. 
If you don't specify any options, the driver does not customize the count

> operation.

Reviewer: Q: what does an uncustomized operation look like?

The following table describes the options you can set to customize ``estimatedDocumentCount()``:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 30 70
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Property
     - Description

   * - ``comment(BsonValue comment)``
     - | Attaches a ``BsonValue`` comment to the operation. For more information, see the :manual:`insert command
         fields </reference/command/insert/#command-fields>` guide in the
         MongoDB Server manual.  

   * - ``comment(String comment)``
     - | Attaches a ``String`` comment to the operation. For more information, see the :manual:`insert command
         fields </reference/command/insert/#command-fields>` guide in the
         MongoDB Server manual. 

   * - ``MaxTime(long maxTime, TimeUnit timeUnit)``

>      - | Sets the maximum execution time on the server for the operation.

Reviewer: Q: what happens if exceeded?

Modify Estimated Count Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following code uses the ``estimatedDocumentCount()`` method to estimate the

> count of documents in the ``restaurants`` collection. It also attaches a ``String`` comment to the operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
count of documents in the ``restaurants`` collection. It also attaches ``"Estimated count of all documents"``
to the operation as a ``String``.
```

.. code-block:: java

   Publisher<Long> countPublisher = restaurants.estimatedDocumentCount(
           new EstimatedDocumentCountOptions()

>                    .comment("Estimate count of all documents"));

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                   .comment("Estimated count of all documents"));
```

.. meta::
   :keywords: number, amount, estimation, code example

Overview
---------

In this guide, you can learn how to retrieve an exact and an estimated count of the
number of documents in a collection.

Sample Data
~~~~~~~~~~~

The examples in this guide use the ``sample_restaurants.restaurants`` collection
from the :atlas:`Atlas sample datasets </sample-data>`. To learn how to create a
free MongoDB Atlas cluster and load the sample datasets, see
:ref:`<java-rs-getting-started>`.

.. include:: includes/reactor-note.rst

.. _java-rs-accurate-count:

Retrieve an Exact Count
-----------------------

Use the ``countDocuments()`` method to count the number of documents in a
collection. To count the number of documents that match specific search
criteria, pass a query filter to the ``countDocuments()`` method.

To learn more about specifying a query, see :ref:`java-rs-specify-query`.

Count All Documents
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To return a count of all documents in the collection, call the ``countDocuments()``
method and pass in no parameters, as shown in the following example:

.. code-block:: java

   Publisher<Long> countPublisher = restaurants.countDocuments();

>    Flux.from(countPublisher).doOnNext(System.out::println).blockLast();

Reviewer 2: As `countPublisher` will only return a single result its more idiomatic to use a `Mono` - which represents this kind of publisher, that produces at most 1 result. A `Flux` represents a potentially boundless publisher.

So I recommend where only a single result is expected prefer `Mono.from`

Overview
---------

In this guide, you can learn how to retrieve an exact and an estimated count of the
number of documents in a collection.

.. _java-rs-accurate-count:

Retrieve an Exact Count

> --------------------------

Reviewer: I: shorten line to match title

```suggestion
Retrieve an Exact Count
-----------------------
```

To modify the behavior of the count operation, pass the class instance and
chained method calls as the last argument to the ``countDocuments()`` method. 
If you don't specify any options, the driver executes the count operation

> without any modified behavior.

Reviewer: What do you think about just leaving these lines out? To me, it's implied that it will behave like a regular ``countDocuments()`` call.

     - | Sets the index for the operation as a ``Bson`` value. 
         For more information, see the :manual:`hint statement </reference/command/update/#std-label-update-command-hint>`
         in the {+mdb-server+} manual.

   * - ``hintString(String hint)``
     - | Sets the index for the operation as a ``String`` value.
         For more information, see the :manual:`hint statement </reference/command/update/#std-label-update-command-hint>`
         in the {+mdb-server+} manual.

   * - ``limit(int limit)``
     - | Sets a limit for the maximum number of documents the cursor
         returns. For more information, see :manual:`cursor
         </reference/glossary/#std-term-cursor>` in the {+mdb-server+} documentation.

   * - ``MaxTime(long maxTime, TimeUnit timeUnit)``
     - | Sets the maximum execution time on the server for the operation. If the
         operation does not complete before the time limit, the driver terminates
         the operation.

   * - ``skip(int skip)``
     - | Sets the number of documents the query skips before returning results.
         For more information, see :manual:`skip </reference/method/cursor.skip/#cursor.skip>` in the

>          {+mdb-server+} manual

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         {+mdb-server+} manual.
```

To modify the behavior of the count operation, pass the class instance and
chained method calls as the only argument to the ``estimatedDocumentCount()`` method. 
If you don't specify any options, the driver executes the count operation

> without any modified behavior.

Reviewer: same as above
